Review of Ben Macintyre’s Book
The Man Who Would Be King by Ray King

[]

Now I ask you­am I to add to my list of prominent Harlans (Supreme Court justices, senator, president’s daughter-in-law) another one: Josiah Harlan? 

I had never heard of him until Dan Harlan’s drama about Harlans at the 2002 national reunion and a piece about him in The Harlan Record that year. But “prominent”? Army doctor, spy, Punjab governor and Afghan army commander ... and Afghan king! ? Now that’s something else. That’s prominent.

I’m staring at page 335 of “The Book”­Alpheus Harlan’s History and Genealogy of the Harlan Family­ where he lists Josiah Harlan (#1200). Meager information. Yet the paragraph slowly swells to the size of a 300-page book, The Man Who Would Be King­The First American in Afghanistan, by Ben Macintyre (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2004).

Macintyre, a London Times correspondent, has been in Afghanistan several times. He found references to Josiah Harlan there that reminded him of “Daniel Dravot” in Rudyard Kipling’s The Man Who Would Be King. He researched Josiah’s story there and in America. And in a small museum in Chester County, Pa., he found a tattered yellow manuscript written by Josiah, plus letters, poems, drawings and­ incredibly­a 170-year-old document naming the American as the king of Ghor in Afghanistan. It had been thought that Josiah’s papers, including his autobiography, had been lost in a house fire in 1929. With the discovery of Josiah’s writings, Macintyre was able to use actual quotations from Josiah while writing his book. 

Macintyre tells a fascinating story of reckless adventurer, with political intrigue, extreme personal danger, plots and sub-plots, accomplishment and frustration. Of the many risks Josiah took, the author says, “Harlan enjoyed only the protection of his abilities. They were more than sufficient.”

Josiah came to love Afghanistan in his twelve years in that region. As a botanist he reveled in their gardens and productivity. He learned their language and culture and had close friends there.

He was in the service of Shah Shujah, deposed Kabul ruler who, in exile, lived in Ludhiana, in farthest west India. Josiah first went to Kabul to spy out the feasibility of the Shah’s return to power there. He concluded it wouldn’t happen without British armed support.

He next was governor of Gujrat under the Maharaja Ranjit Singh, King of Lahore­Punjab. He spent most of the time as a close companion and army commander for Dost Mohammed Khan, ruler of Kabul, who had threatened to kill Josiah while the latter was an envoy of Ranjit Singh in peace talks.

Kipling’s “king” was evidently inspired by Josiah’s military campaign northwest of Kabul to put down a warlord who was raiding villages and selling all inhabitants into slavery. It was on that venture that Josiah received the written document declaring him a king. It wasn’t won by conquest but conferred in an agreement with the Mohammed Reffee, of the Hazara people. It was to secure Josiah’s help in civil and military development in the Hazara region. We’ll never know how it would have worked out because Josiah was never back there again.

In recruiting an army years before, and on this military campaign, Josiah flew the Stars and Stripes with no authority from America to use this ensign for military exploits there. It seems a bizarre kind of colonizing­ maybe even misrepresentation.

From boyhood, Josiah was an admirer of Alexander the Great. He thought often of Alexander while there. He stood in places where Alexander stood and followed the same route the Greek chose when coming from the north into Afghanistan. He imagined himself a successor of Alexander­with the same objective to bring 
righteous progress to an oppressed people by taking up arms against the systems then in place.

Josiah was in Afghanistan when the British army won a devastating victory over the Afghans in 1839. Later, when back in America, he published a scathing criticism of the British brutal misrule of Afghans. He said they sowed the seeds of their own death by wholesale massacre in 1842, after only two years and five months of British rule. Needless to say, his book was so inflammatory that he could find no publisher for his other writings.

Josiah returned to America in 1841. He had been removed from membership in the Quaker Meeting in Chester County, Pa., because of his military service. He was reinstated and married Elizabeth Baker in 1849 in a Quaker ceremony. With the onset of the Civil War in 1861, he recruited a cavalry unit for the Union 
Army. After a difficult training period involving conflict with junior officers, Colonel Harlan became too ill to continue and left the army in 1862. 

He died in 1871 in San Francisco, where a city directory listed him as “Harlan, J., physician, dwelling at 1091 Market Street.” (Actually, Josiah wasn’t trained as a doctor but had some of his brother’s medical books, making him more of a medic than a doctor.)

If we could, we might add the details Ben Macintyre provides to Alpheus Harlan’s account on page 335 and conclude, “And that’s the rest of the story.”

----------------------------------------------------------

Editor’s Note: Ben Macintyre’s book has received a fair amount of media attention since it was published in May, particularly because of current events in Afghanistan and Iraq. Harlan cousins have sent in notices and reviews from several publications, including < nytimes.com > (Macintyre compares 19th-century British military activities in Afghanistan to America’s activities today in this commentary posted May 8), the New York Review of Books (May 13), Publishers Weekly (date unknown), The Spectator (June 26), The New Yorker (May 17), and BBC News Online (May 26). 

The BBC news article states that two great, great, great-grandsons of Josiah Harlan have been located­Scott Reiniger, a Hollywood actor who starred in the 1978 horror film Dawn of the Living Dead, and his younger brother, Harlan. The brothers are descendants of Josiah and Elizabeth’s daughter, Sarah Victoria. Ben Macintyre attempted to track Josiah’s heirs but ran into difficulty since his only child was a daughter. 

Scott remembers his father talking about Josiah and showing him the adventurer’s sword, which is now owned by brother Harlan.

As a result of a signed treaty, the title “Prince of Ghor” is to be granted, in perpetuity, to Josiah’s heirs. Scott learned that he is prince of the Afghan province of Ghor when brother Harlan read reviews of Macintyre’s book and notified Scott. Scott’s initial reaction was that the news was “incredibly surreal.” He said he has no intention of claiming the title and added that his brother should have it since he has the Harlan name and is the family historian. 

Macintyre is quoted as saying, “The treaty remains in effect, although it would be a brave man who attempted to reassert his claim to be the Prince of Ghor.” 


HARLAN FAMILY IN AMERICA OFFICERS 

OFFICERS
President: Robert R. Harlan 
1716 Clark Ave, Yuba City, CA 95991
Vice-President: Junior F. Harlan 
6218 E. Betty Elyse Ln, Scottsdale AZ 85254
Secretary: Ruth Harlan Lamb 
4305 S. Bryant Ct., Independence, MO  64055
harlamb@aol.com 
Treasurer: John R. Harlan 
422 Aumond Rd, Augusta GA 30909

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Katherine M. Harlan (PA)
Robert A.Harlan (PA)
William K. Harlan (CA)
Connie J. King (VT)
Gerry Harlan Lundgren (IA)
Mary Harlan Murphy (PA)
Liz Harlan Sly (NJ)

BOARD MEMBERS EMERITI 
Dan Harlan (VA)
Ridge Harlan (AZ/CA)



The Harlan Record is published semi-annually by

The Harlan Family in America
P. O. Box 1654 
Independence, MO 64055

a permanent organization established to document the historical contributions made by Harlans in America. Submissions of articles are welcome. They are subject to editing and may be held until a future issue if space is limited. 

E-mail to: C. J. King, Editor 
joking@sover.net 

or mail to the organization’s address shown above.

Editorial Board: John L. Harlan, Diana Harlan Wells, Ed Wynn

If you want an electronic version of The Harlan Record, e-mail your request to: harlamb@aol.com 
The e-mail newsletter will be sent close to the time that printed newsletters are mailed. The Harlan Record is also available on the Harlan Web site: 
www.harlanfamily.org under the link “Newsletter”


Note: Deadline for next newsletter is February 15, 2005. 



FINANCIAL REPORT- September 1, 2004
CASH IN SAVINGS ACCOUNT 3/1/04 $22,212.15
INCOME 
Contributions  780.38 
Harlan Genealogy Book Sales 1,174.61
Interest Earned (Savings Account) 38.26
Harlan Store Sales 161.25
-- TOTAL INCOME $2,154.50

DISBURSEMENTS:
Book Storage, Insurance, Shipping 297.73
Newsletter Printing/ Mailing 1,000.00
2007 Reunion Mail’g 203.24
All Hallows Church Contribution 800.00
Chester County Historical Society Contribution 125.00
--TOTAL DISBURSEMENTS $2,425.97

CASH IN SAVINGS & CHECKING ACCOUNTS 9/1/2004 $21,940.68

Genealogy Book Still Available

The book, The History and Genealogy of the Harlan Family and Particularly of the Descendants of George and Michael Harlan, compiled by Alpheus Harlan and 
published in 1914, may be ordered from:

Peggy Harlan Talley
104 Fern
Poteau, OK 74953

The cost of the book is $60, postpaid. Make check payable to The Harlan Family in America.

 


Contributions to the  Remembrance Fund 

In Memory of .... 

Zona Irene Brindle,
by Joseph & Mary Kloppenberg

C. L. Harlan,
by John Lea Harlan

Connie and Lowell Harlan,
by Robert & Elizabeth Sly

David Franklin Harlan,
by Fred L. & Carol Harlan

Ida Harlan Kelly,
by Mildred Brown

James R. Matthews II,
by his wife, Carol H. Matthews


Contributions to the Harlan Family in America Fund 
from March 1, 2004 - September 1, 2004 

CA- Russ & Sandy Harrison
CA- Carol H. Matthews 
CO- Joseph & Mary Kloppenberg
FL- Carolyn & Douglas Jones
IA- Phyllis & George Luckinbill
IL- Robert & Ellen Davis
IL- Clifford & Louise Hullinger
IN- Ray & Melba King
KY- Rebecca Harlan Carpenter
KY- Capt. Richard Dwight Harlan, USN (Ret.)
KY- Rachel J. Lewis 
MD- Mary Howe Kiraly
MD- Robert L. Gault
MO- Dorothy Harlan
MO- Dorothy & Jim Harlan
MO- William Marion Harlan
MO- Shirley May
NY- Col. & Mrs. T. L. Harlan
OH- Earl C. Harlan
OR- Wilbur V. Harlan
PA- Carol & Fred Harlan
TN- Grover V. Harlan
TX - Mildred Brown
TX- Peggy Roberts
VA- Barbara & Harry Crosson
VA- John Lea Harlan
VA- Jean Simmons 

Thank you! 
 


Wayne Harlan Gives Blood­Lots of It
Some information taken from a June 21, 2004, article by Hali Cartee of the Palladium-Item newspaper staff, Richmond, Ind.

Wayne Harlan of Liberty, Ind., has donated blood since 1940 when he was 16 years old. Now 79, he has donated almost 43 gallons.

He got started when his high school coach asked him and a school mate to give blood for the coach’s aunt who happened to be Wayne’s neighbor. Blood was then collected in glass bottles. Since then he has donated when called upon, including for the American Red Cross during World War II.

Wayne has been active in Freemasonry for over 58 years, once serving as Master of his lodge and as secretary for the last 34 years. In the 1980s, his Masonic Lodge in Liberty established a blood bank for both lodge members and anyone else in need. 

He remembers one night when he received a phone call about a man with cancer who needed blood. Lodge members provided 21 pints of blood to the man, and the thought still brings tears to his eyes. Wayne recalls how grateful the man’s mother was and said, “Things like that are just a part of living. You give to each other.” His philosophy is simple: give blood if you can.

Wayne continues to give to his neighbors and community in a number of ways. He mows the old school yard in Kitchel, Ind., and every Wednesday he drives a Dodge van to take veterans to the Dayton Veterans Affairs Medical Center. 

While at the VA, he helps at the information desk, directing patients or providing wheelchairs and escorting patients to appointments. He volunteers his time through the Wayne County Veterans Council.But it’s the listening that is important.

“Each person has his own story to tell. The best thing is to listen,” he said. “I’d go every day if they’d let me.”

Wayne has helped provide Masonic funeral services for members since 1952. In April 2004, he conducted a Masonic service for his brother, Lowell B. Harlan, at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia. “It was not easy,” he said.

Wayne has often wondered how many of the extended Harlan Family are Masons and has expressed a wish to hear from them. If you’re a Mason, you may contact him at 3847 E. Kitchel Rd., Liberty, Ind. 47353.


Reno To Be Site of 2007 Reunion

The Harlan Family in America board of directors held its annual meeting in Reno, Nev., April 17, 2004, and picked that city as the site for its next national reunion.

Reno is less than an hour’s drive from the infamous Donner Pass, which proved deadly to some western migrants in the winter of 1846-47, but was the gateway to a new life in California for the luckier Harlan party. Not only does the area provide an important site for learning about Harlan history, it also abounds in natural beauty, western amusements and history, and adult and family entertainment.

The reunion will be held July 12-15, 2007, at the John Ascuaga’s Nugget Hotel. Tentative plans are for registration, tours, and an opening reception on Thursday; offsite group activities on Friday; workshops (including one on the Harlans’ western trek), a banquet on Saturday; and a church service and closing brunch on Sunday. Several direct descendants of George Harlan #852, who led his group’s wagon train, will help to plan the program.

The hotel will provide complimentary meeting and function space on the second floor, where children can also enjoy the pool and a video arcade. On the hotel’s first floor are casino spaces and nine restaurants. Movie theaters are across the street, and parks, bowling alleys, and Lake Tahoe are nearby.

The hotel has guaranteed that the base rate for its rooms will be no more than $95 a night, single or double. Guests can use the hotel’s fitness center, spas and pool free of charge. The area offers a whole range of accommodations, including motels and camping.

William K. (Bill) Harlan, of California, a descendant of wagon train leader George Harlan, was elected to fill an opening on the board. He has also agreed to present information about his great-grandfather for the 2007 reunion.

Coordinators for the various areas of responsibility have been selected to begin planning the reunion. Participation from other Harlan cousins is welcome­ please let us know how you would like to help!

The board also voted to donate $750 to the All Hallows Church at Sutton-on-the-Forest in York, England, which has 15 monuments to two dozen Harlans. The church still uses a silver chalice presented to the church by Richard Harland, who lived from 1592-1689, and who is buried there. In May 2003, the Harlan family group that toured Northeast England visited this church as well as other Harlan-related sites (see page one story in The Harlan Record, Fall 2003).

The board’s next meeting will be held in Sacramento, Calif., on April 23, 2005. 

For a sneak preview of the Nugget hotel, visit its Web site: www.janugget.com and the Visitor Authority’s Web site: www.renolaketahoe.com 

Reunion updates will be in our twice yearly newsletter, with full details in the spring of 2006. 


First Reunion for Descendants of Joe Ryan Family 

Each of the five grown children of Joseph Patrick Ryan and Olia Elgin (Bryant) Ryan was represented at the first Ryan reunion at Lake Wappapella State Park in southeast Missouri. Forty-six family members came for the August 14 gathering. Joe descends from Rebecca Jane Harlan (#2379).

Activities included horseshoe-pitching, swimming, card playing, a marshmallow roast, singing, visiting among cousins, aunts, and uncles, and sharing genealogy research. A park pavilion was the scene of the noon potluck meal, and the next day, 16 members of the family enjoyed a float trip on the Current River out of Van Buren, Mo.

The Ryans’ oldest son, Jerry Patrick, was represented at the reunion by his widow, Laura, and daughter, Joy, of Crystal City, Mo.

Daughter Gertrude Olia Ryan Downie resides in a care home in Nevada, Mo. and did not attend. However, each of her four children were there: Donald and Lorraine Downie of Athens, Ga.; Norman and Rosemary Downie Noel of Bronaugh, Mo.; Karl and Sharon Noel, Bryant, Chase and Evan of Carl Junction, Mo.; Henry and Amy Noel Lampazzi, Peter and Noel of Houston, Texas; Stuart and Patty Noel, Ian, Andrew, Jessie, and Sammy of Lee Summit, Mo.; Rod and Ginger Downie of Covington, La.; and Patricia Downie, Matt and Erin of Glenburnie, Md.

Representing Arnold Linden Ryan were his widow Nola, Greenville, Texas, and daughter-in-law, Stacy Ryan, of Arlington, Texas. (Note: A story about the late Arnold Ryan, a coach, was in the 2004 Spring issue of The Harlan Record.)

Carl Willard Ryan attended with two children and families: Mike and Stephanie Ryan Fisher, Jason and Peter of House Springs, Mo.; and John and Beth Ryan, Cameron and Cole of Springfield, Mo. Thad Bryant and Phyllis Ryan attended with their two children and families: Jerry and Toni Ryan Dement, Lindsay and Jami of Cape Girardeau, Mo.; and Keith and Carmella Ryan, Jessica and Jake Bryant of Fenton, Mo. 


Fifty-fifth Harlan Reunion in Texas

The Texas Harlans are meeting again­their 55th Annual Reunion will be held at the Blue Ridge Baptist Church on Saturday and Sunday, October 2 and 3. The church is located on FM-1771 about 10 miles east-southeast of Marlin.

From 2:00-5:00 p.m. on Saturday afternoon, there will be visiting, family stories and tours of Harlan ancestor gravesites in the Blue Ridge Cemetery.

Saturday evening’s event is a 6:30 gathering at Los Pepes Cafe in Marlin for a Dutch treat meal.

The Sunday schedule is:
10:00 - Sunday School
11:00 - Church service
Noon meal ($7.50 catered buffet lunch; please RSVP by September 30 to M. F. Turner (972-252-1194) or to Robert Powers (254-399-9564).
1:00 Harlan Reunion business meeting
1:30 Founders Tour
3:00 Blue Ridge Cemetery Association meeting

Reunion functions will be held under the new metal pavilion between the church and cemetery, weather permitting.

Any corrections or additions to the mailing list should be sent to: 
Robert Powers
7100 Canterbury Drive
Waco, TX 76712-3964.


end of part 1